The Project Gutenberg eBook of Summer Morning, by Thomas Miller

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Summer Morning
       A poem

Author: Thomas Miller

Release Date: December 15, 2021 [eBook #66946]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The Internet
             Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SUMMER MORNING ***




                            SUMMER MORNING.

                                LONDON:
                       PRINTED BY SAMUEL BENTLEY
                       Bangor House, Shoe Lane.




                            SUMMER MORNING.

                                A POEM.

                                  BY
                            THOMAS MILLER.

           AUTHOR OF “A DAY IN THE WOODS,” “RURAL SKETCHES,”
     “BEAUTIES OF THE COUNTRY,” “ROYSTON GOWER,” “FAIR ROSAMOND,”
                “LADY JANE GREY,” “GIDEON GILES,” ETC.

                            [Illustration]

                                LONDON:
              JAMES HAYWARD AND CO. 53, PATERNOSTER ROW.

                                 1841.




                            SUMMER MORNING.


    Morning again breaks through the mines of Heaven,
      And shakes her jewelled kirtle on the sky,
    Heavy with rosy gold. Aside are driven
      The vassal clouds, which bow as she draws nigh,
      And catch her scattered gems of orient dye,
    The pearlèd-ruby which her pathway strews;
      Argent and amber, now thrown useless by.
    The uncoloured clouds wear what she doth refuse,
    For only once does Morn her sun-dyed garments use.

    No print of sheep-track yet hath crushed a flower;
      The spider’s woof with silvery dew is hung
    As it was beaded ere the daylight hour:
      The hookèd bramble just as it was strung,
      When on each leaf the Night her crystals flung,
    Then hurried off, the dawning to elude;
      Before the golden-beakèd blackbird sung,
    Or ere the yellow-brooms, or gorses rude,
    Had bared their armèd heads in lowly gratitude.

    From Nature’s old cathedral sweetly ring
      The wild-bird choirs--burst of the woodland band,
    Green-hooded nuns, who ’mid the blossoms sing;
      Their leafy temple, gloomy, tall, and grand,
      Pillared with oaks, and roofed with Heaven’s own hand.
    Hark! how the anthem rolls through arches dun:--
      “Morning again is come to light the land;
    The great world’s Comforter, the mighty Sun,
      Has yoked his golden steeds, the glorious race to run.”

    Those dusky foragers, the noisy rooks,
      Have from their green high city-gates rushed out,
    To rummage furrowy fields and flowery nooks;
      On yonder branch now stands their glossy scout.
      As yet no busy insects buzz about,
    No fairy thunder o’er the air is rolled:
      The drooping buds their crimson lips still pout;
    Those stars of earth, the daisies white, unfold,
    And soon the buttercups will give back “gold for gold.”

    “Hark! hark! the lark” sings ’mid the silvery blue;
      Behold her flight, proud man! and lowly bow.
    She seems the first that does for pardon sue,
      As though the guilty stain which lurks below
      Had touched the flowers that drooped above her brow,
    When she all night slept by the daisies’ side;
      And now she soars where purity doth flow,
    Where new-born light is with no sin allied,
    And pointing with her wings Heaven-ward our thoughts would guide.

    In belted gold the bees with “merry march”
      Through flowery towns go sounding on their way:
    They pass the streakèd woodbine’s sun-stained arch,
      And onward glide through streets of sheeted May,
      Nor till they reach the summer-roses stay,
    Where maiden-buds are wrapt in dewy dreams,
      Drowsy through breathing back the new-mown hay,
    That rolls its fragrance o’er the fringèd streams,--
    Mirrors in which the Sun now decks his quivering beams.

    Uprise the lambs, fresh from their flowery slumber,
      (The daisies they pressed down rise from the sod;)--
    He guardeth them who every star doth number,
      Who called His Son a lamb,--“the Lamb of God;”
      And for His sake withdrew th’ uplifted rod,
    Bidding each cloud turn to a silvery fleece,
      The imaged flock for which our Shepherd trod
    The paths of sorrow, that we might find peace:--
    Those emblems of his love will wave till time shall cease.

    On the far sky leans the old ruined mill,
      Through its rent sails the broken sunbeams glow,
    Gilding the trees that belt the lower hill,
      And the old thorns which on its summit grow.
      Only the reedy marsh that sleeps below,
    With its dwarf bushes, is concealed from view;
      And now a struggling thorn its head doth show,
    Another half shakes off the smoky blue,
    Just where the dusty gold streams through the heavy dew:

    And there the hidden river lingering dreams,
      You scarce can see the banks which round it lie;
    That withered trunk, a tree, or shepherd seems,
      Just as the light or fancy strikes the eye.
      Even the very sheep, which graze hard by,
    So blend their fleeces with the misty haze,
      They look like clouds shook from the unsunned sky,
    Ere morning o’er the eastern hills did blaze:--
    The vision fades as they move further on to graze.

    A chequered light streams in between the leaves,
      Which on the greensward twinkle in the sun;
    The deep-voiced thrush his speckled bosom heaves,
      And like a silver stream his song doth run,
      Down the low vale, edgèd with fir-trees dun.
    A little bird now hops beside the brook,
      “Peaking” about like an affrighted nun;
    And ever as she drinks doth upward look,
    Twitters and drinks again, then seeks her cloistered nook.

    What varied colours o’er the landscape play!
      The very clouds seem at their ease to lean,
    And the whole earth to keep glad holiday.
      The lowliest bush that by the waste is seen,
      Hath changed its dusky for a golden green
    In honour of this lovely Summer Morn:
      The rutted roads did never seem so clean,
    There is no dust upon the wayside thorn,
    For every bud looks out as if but newly born.

    A cottage girl trips by with side-long look,
      Steadying the little basket on her head;
    And where a plank bridges the narrow brook
      She stops, to see her fair form shadowèd.
      The stream reflects her cloak of russet red;
    Below she sees the trees and deep-blue sky,
      The flowers which downward look in that clear bed,
    The very birds which o’er its brightness fly:--
    She parts her loose-blown hair, then wondering passes by.

    Now other forms move o’er the footpaths brown
      In twos and threes; for it is Market-day.
    Beyond those hills stretches a little town,
      And thitherward the rustics bend their way,
      Crossing the scene in blue, and red, and grey;
    Now by green hedge-rows, now by oak-trees old,
      As they by stile or thatchèd cottage stray.
    Peep through the rounded hand, and you’ll behold
    Such gems as Morland drew, in frames of sunny gold.

    A ladened ass, a maid with wicker maun’,
      A shepherd lad driving his lambs to sell,
    Gaudy-dressed girls move in the rosy dawn,
      Women whose cloaks become the landscape well,
      Farmers whose thoughts on crops and prizes dwell;
    An old man with his cow and calf draws near.
      Anon you hear the Village Carrier’s bell;
    Then does his grey old tilted cart appear,
    Moving so slow, you think he never will get there.

    They come from still green nooks, woods old and hoary,
      The silent work of many a summer night,
    Ere those tall trees attained their giant glory,
      Or their dark tops did tower that cloudy height:
      They come from spots which the grey hawthorns light,
    Where stream-kissed willows make a silvery shiver.
      For years their steps have worn those footpaths bright
    Which wind along the fields and by the river,
    That makes a murmuring sound, a “ribble-bibble” ever.

    A troop of soldiers pass with stately pace,--
      Their early music wakes the village street:
    Through yon white blinds peeps many a lovely face,
      Smiling--perchance unconsciously how sweet!
      One does the carpet press with blue-veined feet,
    Not thinking how her fair neck she exposes,
      But with white foot timing the drum’s deep beat;
    And, when again she on her pillow dozes,
    Dreams how she’ll dance that tune ’mong Summer’s richest roses.

    So let her dream, even as beauty should!
      Let the white plumes athwart her slumbers sway!
    Why should I steep their swaling snow in blood,
      Or bid her think of battle’s grim array?
      Truth will too soon her blinding star display,
    And like a fearful comet meet her eyes.
      And yet how peaceful they pass on their way!
    How grand the sight as up the hill they rise!--
    I will not think of cities reddening in the skies.

    How sweet those rural sounds float by the hill!
      The grasshopper’s shrill chirp rings o’er the ground,
    The jingling sheep-bells are but seldom still,
      The clapping gate closes with hollow bound,
      There’s music in the church-clock’s measured sound.
    The ring-dove’s song, how breeze-like comes and goes,
      Now here, now there, it seems to wander round:
    The red cow’s voice along the upland flows;
    His bass the brindled bull from the far meadow lows.

    “Cuckoo! cuckoo!” ah! well I know thy note,
      Those summer-sounds the backward years do bring,
    Like Memory’s locked-up barque once more afloat:
      They carry me away to life’s glad spring,
      To home, with all its old boughs rustleìng.
    ’Tis a sweet sound! but now I feel not glad;
      I miss the voices which were wont to sing,
    When on the hills I roamed, a happy lad.
    “Cuckoo!” it is the grave--not thee--that makes me sad.

    Tell me, ye sages, whence these feelings rise,--
      Sorrowful mornings on the darkened soul;
    Glimpses of broken, bright, and stormy skies,
      O’er which this earth--the heart--has no control?
      Why does the sea of thought thus backward roll?
    Memory’s the breeze that through the cordage raves,
      And ever drives us on some home-ward shoal,
    As if she loved the melancholy waves
    That, murmuring shore-ward break, over a reef of graves.

    Hark how the merry bells ring o’er the vale,
      Now near, remote, or lost, just as it blows.
    The red cock sends his voice upon the gale,
      From the thatched grange his answering rival crows:
      The milkmaid o’er the dew-bathed meadow goes,
    Her tucked-up kirtle ever holding tight;
      And now her song rings through the green hedge-rows,
    Her milk-kit hoops glitter like silver bright:--
    I hear her lover singing somewhere out of sight.

    Where soars that spire, our rude forefathers prayed;
      Thither they came, from many a thick-leaved dell
    Year after year, and o’er those footpaths strayed,
      When summoned by the sounding Sabbath bell,--
      For in those walls they deemed that God did dwell.
    And still they sleep within that bell’s deep sound.
      Yon Spire doth here of no distinction tell;
    O’er rich and poor, marble, and earthly mound,
    The Monument of all,--it marks one common ground.

    See yonder smoke, before it curls to Heaven
      Mingles its blue amid the elm-trees tall;
    Shrinking like one who fears to be forgiven,
      So on the earth again doth prostrate fall,
      And ’mid the bending green each sin recall.
    Now from their beds the cottage-children rise,
      Roused by some early playmate’s noisy bawl;
    And, on the door-step standing, rub their eyes,
    Stretching their little arms, and gaping at the skies.

    The leaves “drop, drop,” and dot the crisped stream
      So quick, each circle wears the first away;
    Far out the tufted bulrush seems to dream,
      And to the ripple nods its head alway;
      The water-flags with one another play,
    Bowing to every breeze that blows between,
      While purple dragon-flies their wings display:
    The restless swallow’s arrowy flight is seen,
    Dimpling the sunny wave, then lost amid the green.

    The boy who last night passed that darksome lane,
      Trembling at every sound, and pale with fear;
    Who shook when the long leaves talked to the rain,
      And tried to sing, his sinking heart to cheer;
      Hears now no brook wail ghost-like on his ear,
    No dead-man’s groan in the black-beetle’s wing:
      But where the deep-dyed butterflies appear,
    And on the flowers like folded pea-blooms swing,
    With napless hat in hand he after them doth spring.

    In the far sky the distant landscape melts,
      Like pilèd clouds tinged with a darker hue;
    Even the wood which yon high upland belts
      Looks like a range of clouds, of deeper blue.
      One withered tree bursts only on the view,--
    A bald bare oak, which on the summit grows,
      (And looks as if from out the sky it grew:)
    That tree has borne a thousand wintry snows,
    And seen unnumbered mornings gild its gnarled boughs.

    Yon weather-beaten grey old finger-post
      Stands like Time’s land-mark pointing to decay;
    The very roads it once marked out are lost:
      The common was encroached on every day
      By grasping men who bore an unjust sway,
    And rent the gift from Charity’s dead hands.
      The post does still one broken arm display,
    Which now points out where the New Workhouse stands,
    As if it said “Poor man! those walls are all thy lands.”

    Where o’er yon woodland-stream dark branches bow,
      Patches of blue are let in from the sky,
    Throwing a chequered underlight below,
      Where the deep waters steeped in gloom roll by;
      Looking like Hope, who ever watcheth nigh,
    And throws her cheering ray o’er life’s long night,
      When wearied man would fain lie down and die.
    Past the broad meadow now it rolleth bright,
    Which like a mantle green seems edged with silver light.

    All things, save Man, this Summer morn rejoice:
      Sweet smiles the sky, so fair a world to view;
    Unto the earth below the flowers give voice;
      Even the wayside-weed of homeliest hue
      Looks up erect amid the golden blue,
    And thus it speaketh to the thinking mind:--
      “O’erlook me not! I for a purpose grew,
    Though long mayest thou that purpose try to find,
    On us one sunshine falls! God only is not blind!”

    England, my country!--land that gave me birth!
      Where those I love, living or dead, still dwell,
    Most sacred spot--to me--of all the earth;
      England! “with all thy faults I love thee well.”
      With what delight I hear thy Sabbath bell
    Fling to the sky its ancient English sound,
      As if to the wide world it dared to tell
    We own a God, who guards this envied ground,
    Bulwarked with martyrs’ bones--where Fear was never found.

    Here might a sinner humbly kneel and pray,
      With this bright sky, this lovely scene in view,
    And worship Him who guardeth us alway!--
      Who hung these lands with green, this sky with blue,
      Who spake, and from these plains huge cities grew;
    Who made thee, mighty England! what thou art,
      And asked but gratitude for all His due.
    The Giver, God! claims but the beggar’s part,
    And only doth require “a humble, contrite heart.”


London: Printed by Samuel Bentley, Bangor House, Shoe Lane.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SUMMER MORNING ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
